---
title: Supporting those that support Open Research
tags: ["open research", "open access", "open data", "Cambridge"]
comments: true
---

The [Office of Scholarly Communication](http://osc.cam.ac.uk) (OSC) is
the main structure that focuses on all matters related to open
research at the University of Cambridge. It *stays abreast of new
scholarly communication tools, techniques, policies and practices for
the University.* The OSC and its team do an outstanding job to support
and train all researchers Open Access and Research Data policies. 

The OSC, despite its critical contributions, is currently
[under review](https://www.admin.cam.ac.uk/reporter/2016-17/weekly/6466/section1.shtml#heading2-6).
A review is not a very nice position to be in, but it could also be an
opportunity to highlight to the top managers of the University what an
important role the OSC plays, and hopefully resulting in more open
research support at the University. 

The members of the University were invited to contribute to the
review. I sent my comments out; here they are.


Dear Office of Scholarly Communication Review Panel,

I am writing to provide feedback for the review of the Office of
Scholarly Communication (OSC), following the invitation for comments
in the University Reporter No 6466, Vol CXLVII No 32. In this letter,
I will describe the reasons why open research is an essential
mechanism of modern scholarship, document my personal experience with
the OSC and how it currently addresses these needs, and how the
University could continue to further improve their support the open
research.

There is a clear and unstoppable trend towards greater openness in
research, ranging from wider and more open dissemination of all
research outputs (data, software, material and methods, and research
manuscripts), to a desire for more transparency in the research
processes themselves (open peer review, pre-registration, early
publication of pre-prints and consideration of these in grant
proposals). The reasons underlying this drive for open research range
from wider dissemination within and beyond the scientific community,
to supporting better reproducibility and thus greater trust in
research outputs. These changes are promoted and supported by many
researchers, especially early career researchers (ECRs), by new
publishers and data sharing platforms, as well as major UK funders
(for example BBSRC, MRC and Wellcome Trust in particular). This
changing research landscape is an opportunity for those that can adapt
and appreciate the necessity of open research, and a threat to those
that cannot or do not want to embrace open research.

It is essential for an institution such as the University of
Cambridge, that benefits from a unique prestige and position in
national and international research to be at the forefront of these
changes. To do so, it needs to support its researchers in making these
transitions by informing them, and by providing adequate training and
infrastructure. In addition, an institution of such a calibre ought to
go beyond the mere minimal requirements mandated by funders, but
should play a leading and pioneering role in understanding and
defining the future directions of this changing open research
landscape.

  
Who, at the University of Cambridge, is in a better position to
successfully address these fundamental needs of an ever more dynamic
research horizon than the Office of Scholarly Communication?  The OSC
has, over the years, been extremely successful in informing, training
and supporting researchers toward greater openness in their research,
as required by the funding bodies. For example, the OSC has been
instrumental in making scholarly outputs available via green and gold
open access (OA) models, administering these dedicated funds, and
assisting researchers in complying with their funder's OA
requirements. The OSC has facilitated and even at times enabled the
communication around open research between researchers and individual
researchers their departments (for instance by expressing their
support of the Data Champions directly to their respective Heads of
Departments). Importantly, the OSC has been able to reach out widely,
from graduate students to PIs, departments and libraries at the
University, and the wider community of stakeholders who influence open
data, open access and open research in general.

The OSC has been leading the way with various innovative projects to
promote open research practice and open researchers, such as the Data
Champions initiative and the Open Research Pilot Project (in
collaboration with the Wellcome Trust). The OSC has successfully
engaged with many stakeholders, in particular with researchers and
funders, positioning themselves as a major player in open
research. They are up-to-date with changes in funder requirements,
participate in and foster discussions about the evolution of these
requirements, and hence are ahead of the curve in terms of support and
service to researchers. These successful activities have reached
beyond the University of Cambridge, and the OSC is seen by
researchers, data managers, managers and librarians around the world,
as a prime example of successful engagement and support with their
research community.

All major funders are going to increasingly regard best practice in
open science as an prime requirement when submitting applications. It
is essential for the researchers at this University to continue to
benefit from the support they currently benefit from to remain
competitive. It is hard to imagine this University maintaining its
world-class reputation, without being at the forefront all aspects of
modern, open research, and the OSC is currently the only entity at the
University of Cambridge, capable of successfully accomplishing these
tasks.

  
On a personal level, as a modern and open scholar, I have immensely
benefited from the support, networking opportunities, and
collaborations (I am an active participant in the Data Champions
initiative and one of the fours participating research groups in the
Open Research Pilot Project) offered by the OSC. This level of support
is not available anywhere else in the University, whether at the level
of the laboratory, the Department, the University Library or any other
official structure withing the University. The OSC helped me realise
my potential as modern, successful open scholar.

I consider it an absolutely necessary for the University of Cambridge
to support open research in general, and the OSC in
particular. Firstly, I would urge the University to:


* to give the OSC its full support, including financial, so that the
  OSC can maintain and expand its highly qualified team and continue
  to support the community.
    
In addition, the University, in collaboration with the OSC, should


* Sign the Declaration of Open Research Assessment
  ([DORA](http://www.ascb.org/dora/) (following the examples of UCL
  and Imperial College)

* Positively value a commitment to open research and publishing
  practices.

* Endorse immediate open publishing, including pre-prints.

* Endorse and value the open publication and dissemination of all
  research outputs, including data, software, material and methods, in
  accordance with the
  [UK Concordat on Open Research Data](http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/documents/documents/concordatonopenresearchdata-pdf/).

* Actively support and train all students and researchers in best open
  research practice in accordance with the
  [UK Concordat to Support the Career Development of Researchers](https://www.vitae.ac.uk/policy/vitae-concordat-vitae-2011.pdf/@@download/file/Vitae-Concordat-Vitae-2011.pdf)
  and the
  [UK Concordat on Research Integrity](http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/policy-and-analysis/reports/Pages/research-concordat.aspx).

* Promote greater transparency by publicly reporting it's own
  expenditure in journal substations and article processing charges,
  and transition it journal subscriptions to distance itself from
  commercial publishers and support OA publishing.

* Enable a wider participation of the academic community, in
  particular ECRs, into the discussions and decision making at the
  various levels at the University by, for example, registering all
  post-doctoral researchers in the Regent House.

In my opinion, the University's support for open research plays a
critical role, both to support its own position on the national and
international scene, and to support its researchers, in particular the
ECRs to remain among the very best in the world. I urge the members of
the panel to continue to and increase their support the OSC.

Yours sincerely

Dr Laurent Gatto

