---
title: Open science and open science
tags: ["open research", "open science"]
comments: true
---

A recent discussion on twitter about *Open Sciences* made me think
about how Open Science can be intimidating, alienating and unwelcoming
at times. 

<!--more-->

Here are some tweets that I found particularly revealing:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en"
dir="ltr">It was a damned hard community to break into. Any step I
took to be more open, I felt attacked for not doing enough/doing it
right.</p>&mdash; Christie Bahlai (@cbahlai) <a
href="https://twitter.com/cbahlai/status/871413258107981824">June 4,
2017</a></blockquote>

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en"
dir="ltr">Anyway- I believe in the open sci mission- that&#39;s why
I&#39;m still here- but we need to really think about how we move
forward.</p>&mdash; Christie Bahlai (@cbahlai) <a
href="https://twitter.com/cbahlai/status/871415702376374274">June 4,
2017</a></blockquote>

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en"
dir="ltr">It&#39;s not just about choosing right licences and putting
code on github, it&#39;s about actually improving accessibility and
bringing people in</p>&mdash; Christie Bahlai (@cbahlai) <a
href="https://twitter.com/cbahlai/status/871416201414574081">June 4,
2017</a></blockquote>

This thinking brought me to the conclusion that it is useful to
distinguish between

> **Open Science** as in **widely disseminated and openly accessible**

and 

> **Open Science** as in **inclusive and welcoming**

As far as I am concerned, the former more technical definition was
always what I was focusing on, and the second community-level aspect
of openness was, somehow, implicit from the former. But that's not the
case, at all. The train of thoughts was that open science leads to
reproducible research and to more trustworthy science, favours
dissemination of the research process and outputs, provides spaces for
more people to express themselves, ... thus favouring better
recognition based on merit. Unfortunately, academia is not based on
merit only (one needs to be "good", of course, but once a certain
level of quality has been attained, there are many other factors that
count), and being an open scientists requires all too often a lot of
combativeness. And there are cases where open science can have serious
drawbacks. For example, when considering open peer review, it is clear
that early career researchers have legitimate reasons to feel
intimidated by openly criticising the work of a senior, well-respected
researcher in their field. Similarly, while I value publishing in open
access journals, I would not, as the senior author in a project,
impose such a decision to a student or post-doc that works with me, if
they felt that another venue was better for their career.

So yes, I have always acknowledged that there were different levels in
**how open one wanted to be**, or **how open one could afford to
be**. I am probably on the very open end of the spectrum. For example
all my software is [openly available](https://github.com/lgatto),
before publication; I publish
[pre-prints](http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2015/07/07/022152)
before
[submission of the manuscript](http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004920);
I publish data asap - note that I generally don't generate new data
myself; pretty much all my work, at least as corresponding author, is
[OA](https://impactstory.org/u/0000-0002-1520-2268); I am a Software
and Data Carpentry instructor and publish
[all my teaching material](https://lgatto.github.io/TeachingMaterial/)
under CC-BY; I am involved in various open activities such as
[OpenConCam](http://www.openconcam.org/),
[Data Champions](http://www.data.cam.ac.uk/datachampions), the
[Open Research Pilot Project](http://osc.cam.ac.uk/open-research/open-research-pilot-project),
... and I do not have the luxury of tenure. But that's my personal
view, and there is no reason to believe it fits others; more moderate
contributions/involvement (also named
[baby steps](https://practicaldatamanagement.wordpress.com/2014/10/23/baby-steps-for-the-open-curious/),
although I personally don't like that term very much) are by no means
worse, or less laudable. I appreciate I have privileges other don't
have - white male, well funded lab (including funders paying for
costly Author Processing Charge), well known institution (I have
witnessed how the attention some people give me has changed since I
moved to Cambridge), and, when I feel strongly about a topic such as
Open Science, I am not afraid of getting into an argument.

The reason I believe it is useful to make the above distinction in
openness is that the two approaches can sometimes conflict. I have
mentioned some reasons above (open peer review and choosing
publication venues), but Open Science, or the supposed
expectations/requirements of Open Science can be particularly
discriminatory for under-represented minorities (URMs), who are
already subject to many implicit and/or explicit biases. Here's a very
revealing storyfied twitter tread explaining how well intended
openness has risks that, in an already biased system, will affect some
people more than others:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en-gb"><p lang="en"
dir="ltr">Re: <a
href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/OpenGlobalSouth?src=hash">#OpenGlobalSouth</a>
here is Storify of discussion w/ <a
href="https://twitter.com/DNLee5">@dnlee5</a> that helped convince me
for need for this conference <a
href="https://t.co/sy4zyzCfzu">https://t.co/sy4zyzCfzu</a></p>&mdash;
Jonathan Eisen (@phylogenomics) <a
href="https://twitter.com/phylogenomics/status/868220913472241664">26
May 2017</a></blockquote>


In the future, I will pay attention to make this distinction, and
clarify that I want to promote both aspects, but that they can, at
times, be difficult to harmonise. I will also emphasise that there is
a gradient of how open one can be, or can afford to be, depending on
circumstances, and that every contribution to Open Science, whether
big or more moderate, is welcome and significant.
